[olm-metrics] Collect data on reachability of Operator SDK from bundle image (#349)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/olm/report-sdk-operators.md

---
title: Enable tracking of SDK operators in OLM metrics
authors:
  - "@varshaprasad96"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2019-05-28
status: implementable
---

# Enable tracking of SDK operators in OLM metrics

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [X] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Summary

This enhancement proposes the addition of operator specific labels to existing OLM metrics, in order to collect data on Redhat operators which utilize SDK to build image bundle.

## Motivation

> Collecting metrics regarding the usage of Operator SDK among operator authors is important to measure the reachability of the tool. Since OLM already has a pipeline built to obtain metrics on operators and report it to the RedHat telemetry, we intend to utilize the same and obtain data on RedHat operators (installed on OpenShift namespaces) using SDK to build bundle images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Collecting metrics regarding the usage of Operator SDK among operator authors is important to measure the reachability of the tool. Since OLM already has a pipeline built to obtain metrics on operators and report it to the Red Hat OpenShift telemetry, we intend to utilize the same and obtain data on Red Hat operators (installed in OpenShift namespaces) using SDK to build bundle images.
```

> Collecting metrics regarding the usage of Operator SDK among operator authors is important to measure the reachability of the tool. Since OLM already has a pipeline built to obtain metrics on operators and report it to the RedHat OpenShift telemetry, we intend to utilize the same and obtain data on Red Hat operators (installed in OpenShift namespaces) using SDK to build bundle images.

Reviewer 2: Why is this data not captured during the certification pipeline?  From a given cluster, an operator and a version uniquely identify an operator's binary bits that can be checked out of band.  I don't think clusters need to report how those operators are built - that would be like a metric that reports what base image a given red hat image uses - it's trivially reproducible from outside of telemetry, and so should not be part of the metrics stack without a very high value use case.

Reviewer 3: I understood the goal to be identification of operators built via sdk outside of red hat pipelines as well as in, to gauge user adoption.

Reviewer 2: Those operators must be submitted by someone to operator hub, right?  I think metrics are fine to be reported from the operator, but I don't think we'd need to or want to gather that from telemetry today.  I might prefer the operator metadata include that data as part of the build process, and then OLM summarize a single metric that reports the count of installed operators with that metadata (instead of asking the operator itself).

Reviewer 4: Correct to be clear we are just implenting labels so that we can pull this data from OLM with this in mind can we please get this PR approved?

At present, some of the OLM metrics track the lifecycle of CSV present in operator bundle and report its status at various stages. These stamps can be parsed by OLM from bundle resources (CSV, CRDs, `annotations.yaml` or `bundle.Dockerfile`) and added to their metrics.

For example, one such metric is `csvSucceeded`. Adding of `BUILDER` and `PROJECT_LAYOUT` label to this metric will enable us to track the version and layout of operator SDK which was used to build the bundle image.

The metric could be modified to:

```Go

	// Prometheus labels added to metrics
	const (
		BUILDER = "builder"
		PROJECT_LAYOUT = "project_layout"
	)

 	csvSucceeded = prometheus.NewGaugeVec(
 		prometheus.GaugeOpts{
 			Name: "csv_succeeded",
 			Help: "Successful CSV install",
 		},
 		[]string{NAMESPACE_LABEL, NAME_LABEL, VERSION_LABEL, BUILDER, PROJECT_LAYOUT},
    )
```

Here, the value of `BUILDER` would be taken from `operators.operatorframework.io/builder` and `PROJECT_LAYOUT` would represent the value of `operators.operatorframework.io/project_layout` from CSV annotations.

An example prometheus metric value would be:

```

> csvSucceeded{namespace="openshift-operator-lifecycle-manager", name="test-operator", version="x", builder="operator-sdk-v0.17.0", project_layout="go.kubebuilder.io/v2.0.0"}

Reviewer: csvSucceeded is not the best metric name, I would change this to be something like `olm_csv_success_total`. I assume this will be incremented on each success?

See best practices -> https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/#metric-names

Author: I agree. But these metric names are currently being used by OLM. (https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager/blob/master/pkg/metrics/metrics.go)

Reviewer 3: IMO a metric name change is high cost and low value - queries that span versions of ocp become more painful.

but we should keep the naming conventions in mind for new metrics, and over time I imagine these poorly named ones will be obsoleted.

```

This data can further be added to OLM dashboard through [RedHat telemetry][cluster_monitoring] and would help us to observe the number of operators built using SDK as well as to analyze the relationship of any specific operator error with corresponding SDK version.

Metric Cardinality Expectation:
The total number of time series for an operator would depend on the possible number of SDK versions and layouts which operators are currently built on. We expect the SDK specifications to be constant for an operator at least till the SDK version is updated in those operators (which is approximately once in 6 months). Hence on an estimate, addition of above mentioned labels should not result in an increase in number of time series for a single operator metric which OLM emits.

**Note**:

> 1. At this point, the two relevant metrics where these labels can be added are `csvSucceeded` and `csvAbnormal`. In future, additional labels can be added on the bundle image which would result in creation of new metrics or addition of more metric labels to existing metrics.

Reviewer: I would suggest two metrics success_total and failures_total metrics.

---
title: Enable tracking of SDK operators in OLM metrics
authors:
  - "@varshaprasad96"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2019-05-28
status: implementable
---

# Enable tracking of SDK operators in OLM metrics

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [X] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Summary

> This enhancement proposes the addition of operator specific labels to existing OLM metrics, in order to collect data on operators which utilize SDK to build image bundle.

Reviewer: Can you specify that this is Red Hat operators only, as we can only send these metrics for red hat OLM operators for now.

## Motivation

Collecting metrics regarding the usage of Operator SDK among operator authors is important to measure the reachability of the tool. Since OLM already has a pipeline built to obtain metrics on operators and report it to the RedHat telemetry, we intend to utilize the same and obtain data on operators using SDK to build bundle images.

## Goals

> The goal of this enhancement is to list the stamps present in SDK which can be added as labels to OLM metrics.

Reviewer: What do you mean by stamps here? Is this an OLM thing? :)

## Proposal

Currently, there is a [proposal][sdk_metrics_proposal] in review which lists the bundle resources in which stamps would be added indicating the use of SDK to build an operator bundle image. 

The proposed stamps have the following format in `bundle.dockerfile` and `annotations.yaml`:
1. operators.operatorframework.io.metrics.mediatype.v1 = “metrics+v1”
2. operators.operatorframework.io.metrics.builder = “operator-sdk-sdkversion”
3. operators.operatorframework.io.metrics.project_layout = “sdk_project_layout/layout_version” 

> 

Reviewer 5: So these would be added to every operator that uses the SDK?  How does that fit with the guideline I've heard that oeprators should send back no more than ~10 metrics, does this count for three of those?  Is that still a valid limit?

Author: Yes, all operators generated through SDK would have these by default. Also, any other operator owner (who do not use SDK) can use these labels and add their custom values. These are only additional labels to existing metrics sent by OLM (not new metrics as such) as of now.
@ecordell could you please confirm whether these would violate any limit set by OLM/telemetry for its metrics ?

Author: Based on the discussions offline, we think the time series limit would not affect us so hard. so having them on operators should be fine.

Reviewer: Can you recap the discussion in the proposal as well, I am interested in the cardinality limits as well :) Thanks!

In CSV and CRDs, they would have the following annotations in Object Metadata:
1. operators.operatorframework.io/builder = “operator-sdk-sdkversion”
2. operators.operatorframework.io/project_layout = “sdk_project_layout/layout_version”

At present, some of the OLM metrics track the lifecycle of CSV present in operator bundle and report its status at various stages. These stamps can be parsed by OLM from bundle resources (CSV, CRDs, `annotations.yaml` or `bundle.Dockerfile`) and added to their metrics.

For example, one such metric is `csvSucceeded`. Adding of `BUILDER` and `PROJECT_LAYOUT` label to this metric will enable us to track the version and layout of operator SDK which was used to build the bundle image.

The metric could be modified to:

```Go
 	csvSucceeded = prometheus.NewGaugeVec(
 		prometheus.GaugeOpts{
 			Name: "csv_succeeded",
 			Help: "Successful CSV install",
 		},
 		[]string{NAMESPACE_LABEL, NAME_LABEL, VERSION_LABEL, BUILDER, PROJECT_LAYOUT},
     )
```

> Here, the value of `BUILDER` would be taken from `operators.operatorframework.io/builder` and `PROJECT_LAYOUT` would represent the value of `operators.operatorframework.io/project_layout` from CSV annotations.

Reviewer: Also as a side note, is that the actual name of the label? If yes, see https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/#labels for best practices :)

> Here, the value of `BUILDER` would be taken from `operators.operatorframework.io/builder` and `PROJECT_LAYOUT` would represent the value of `operators.operatorframework.io/project_layout` from CSV annotations.

Author: we haven't decide on label values yet. Those were just placeholder values. Thanks for the reference though :)

> Here, the value of `BUILDER` would be taken from `operators.operatorframework.io/builder` and `PROJECT_LAYOUT` would represent the value of `operators.operatorframework.io/project_layout` from CSV annotations.

Reviewer: Are those just metrics or labels? I need to know what an example metric with label name and potential value would look like, and the cardinality of it, for the monitoring team telemetry approval :) Do you mind updating the proposal to include those things, thanks! The docs https://docs.google.com/document/d/1a6n5iBGM2QaIQRg9Lw4-Npj6QY9--Hpx3XYut-BrUSY/edit should have an example document should look like, let me know if you have any questions!

This data can further be added to OLM dashboard through [RedHat telemetry][cluster_monitoring] and would help us to observe the number of operators built using SDK as well as to analyze the relationship of any specific operator error with corresponding SDK version.

**Note**:
1. At this point, the two relevant metrics where these labels can be added are `csvSucceeded` and `csvAbnormal`. In future, additional labels can be added on the bundle image which would result in creation of new metrics or addition of more metric labels to existing metrics.
2. The naming of metric labels are generic. This also enables OLM to track operators which have custom label values.

## Risks and Mitigations

> Addition of labels to prometheus metrics will result in new time series and may require modification of existing PromQL queries to collect relevant data. However, this will be an one time process and hence the number of labels which are added to a metric should be restricted based on the nature of data being collected.

Reviewer 5: Is there an upper bound to the number of labels?  Could a container add 1000 labels?

Author: There has not been any upper bound set as of it to the number of labels which would be added by OLM
